Radio migration procedure in ZHA docs (#26236)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/zha.markdown

Within ZHA is possible to use this backup and restore feature to migrate between some different radio types, if the respective radio library supports it. Currently, ZHA supports migrating the Zigbee network between different Zigbee Coordinator adapters based on chips from Silicon Labs, Texas Instruments, or ConBee/RaspBee if the backup was made from inside ZHA.

> ### Zigbee Coordinator adapter migration inside ZHA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrating to a new Zigbee coordinator adapter inside ZHA
```

> To easily migrate from a Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter to another Zigbee Coordinator adapter you can use the config flow for radio migration that is built into the Zigbee Home Automation (ZHA) integration UI. That is, you want to seamlessly migrate from the old Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter that you are already using in the ZHA integration to a new Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow this guide if you have a Zigbee Home Assistant (ZHA) network running and want to migrate from one Zigbee coordinator radio adapter to another Zigbee coordinator radio adapter.
```

> Prerequisites:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prerequisites

```

> - Your old Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter used in the ZHA integration need to be of radio type ezsp (Silicon Labs EmberZnet), znp (Texas Instruments Z-Stack ZNP), or deCONZ (ConBee/RaspBee from dresden elektronik).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Your old Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter is used in the ZHA integration (not in deCONZ or MQTT)
- It is of radio type ezsp (Silicon Labs EmberZnet), znp (Texas Instruments Z-Stack ZNP), or deCONZ (ConBee/RaspBee from dresden elektronik).
```

>   - If your old Zigbee Coordinator is a deCONZ (ConBee/RaspBee) radio adapter then you also need to make sure that is already running [firmware 0x26700700 (from 2021-08-18)](https://github.com/dresden-elektronik/deconz-rest-plugin/wiki/Firmware-Changelog) or later before migrating.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If your old Zigbee coordinator is a deCONZ (ConBee/RaspBee) radio adapter, make sure it is running [firmware 0x26700700 (from 2021-08-18)](https://github.com/dresden-elektronik/deconz-rest-plugin/wiki/Firmware-Changelog) or later.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### To migrate to a new Zigbee coordinator radio inside ZHA

```

> The radio migration flow can be found in the Home Assistant's UI under "Settings" -> "Devices & Services", select "CONFIGURE" on the Zigbee Home Assistant (ZHA) integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Go to **{% my integrations title="Settings > Devices & Services" %}** and select the ZHA integration. Then select **Configure**.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 1. Inside the ZHA integration, under "Network Settings", select "MIGRATE RADIO".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Under **Network settings**, select **Migrate radio**.
```

> 2. "Reconfigure ZHA" will start, informing that ZHA will start and asking if you want to continue, select "SUBMIT".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Reconfiguration of ZHA will start. Select **Submit**.
```

> 3. Under "Migrate or re-configure" select "Migrate to a new radio".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Under **Migrate or re-configure**, select **Migrate to a new radio**.
```

> 4. "Migrate to a new radio" will inform you that an automatic backup will be performed and that your old Zigbee Coordinator radio will be then reset before the backup is automatically restored, select "SUBMIT".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Migrate to a new radio** will inform you that an automatic backup will be performed and that your old Zigbee coordinator radio will then be reset before the backup is automatically restored.
- Select **Submit**.
```

> 5. "Unplug your old radio" will inform you that your old Zigbee Coordinator radio has been reset and you can now plug in your new Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter, (to avoid interference it is recommended to follow the best practices of using a USB extension cable and connecting it to a USB 2.0 port or via a powered USB 2.0 hub). You may now also choose to either unplug your old Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter or keep your old radio plugged in if that radio was a combined Z-Wave and Zigbee radio, like the HUSBZB-1 adapter, as then only the Zigbee radio part of it was reset. Confirm that the Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter is properly connected by selecting "SUBMIT".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Unplug your old radio** will inform you that your old Zigbee coordinator radio has been reset and that you can now plug in your new Zigbee coordinator radio adapter.
  - To avoid interference, use a USB extension cable. 
  - Use a USB 2.0 port or a powered USB 2.0 hub and keep the Zigbee stick away from USB 3.0 devices. 
  - You may now also choose to either unplug your old Zigbee coordinator radio adapter or keep your old radio plugged in.
  - If that radio was a combined Z-Wave and Zigbee radio, like the HUSBZB-1 adapter, then only the Zigbee radio part of it was reset. Confirm that the Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter is properly connected and select **Submit**.
```

> 6.  You now need to start the backup restore process. If your new Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter was automatically discovered by the Zigbee Home Automation (ZHA) integration then select "CONFIGURE", if not then you may first have to restart the radio migration flow under "Network Settings" by selecting "MIGRATE RADIO" -> "Reconfigure ZHA" -> "Migrate to a new radio".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  You now need to start the backup restore process. 
  - If your new Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter was automatically discovered by the Zigbee Home Automation (ZHA) integration, then select **Configure**.  
  - If not, then you might first have to restart the radio migration flow. Under "*Network Settings**, select **Migrate radio** > **Reconfigure ZHA** > **Migrate to a new radio**.
```

> 7. Among the options for "Network Formation" select "Restore and automatic backup".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Under **Network Formation**, select **Restore and automatic backup**.
```

> 8. Choose the latest automatic backup under "Restore Automation Backup" and select "SUBMIT".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Under **Restore Automation Backup**, choose the latest automatic backup and select **Submit**.
```

> 9. Overwrite Radio IEEE Address. Tick the box for "Permanently replace the radio IEEE address" and select "SUBMIT". This may take some time as overwriting the IEEE address may take a while so simply wait. Note that this means that your old Zigbee Coordinator radio and your new stick will have the same Zigbee IEEE address (unique MAC address for the Zigbee device). Selecting this option is required for the migration process to complete successfully. From this point onwards you should not operate the old stick in the same area unless you change the Zigbee IEEE address on it. If you do not migrate the Zigbee IEEE address from your old Zigbee Coordinator radio then you will have to re-join/re-pair many of your devices in order to keep them working. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Under **Overwrite Radio IEEE Address**, select the **Permanently replace the radio IEEE address** and select **Submit**. Overwriting the IEEE address may take a while. Wait. 
  - Your old Zigbee Coordinator radio and your new stick will now have the same Zigbee IEEE address (unique MAC address for the Zigbee device). 
  - Selecting this option is required for the migration process to complete successfully. 
  - From this point onwards, you should not operate the old stick in the same area unless you change the Zigbee IEEE address on it. 
  - If you do not migrate the Zigbee IEEE address from your old Zigbee Coordinator radio, then you will have to re-join/re-pair many of your devices in order to keep them working. 
```

> 10. Final message of "Success!" should pop up with information that all options were successfully saved. Select "FINISH" to confirm. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Finally, a **Success!** message should pop up with information that all options were successfully saved. 
 - Select **Finish** to confirm. 
```

> The migration process is complete, however, be aware that you now need to be a little patient you will not be able to control all your existing Zigbee devices until they rejoined the Zigbee network again. Normally, they will usually rejoin within a couple of hours, but you be able to manually accelerate the rejoin process by power-cycling your Zigbee devices that do not connect fast enough on their own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The migration process is complete. However, be aware that you will not be able to control all your existing Zigbee devices until they rejoined the Zigbee network again. Normally, they will rejoin within a couple of hours. You can accelerate the rejoin process by power-cycling your Zigbee devices.
```

Within ZHA is possible to use this backup and restore feature to migrate between some different radio types, if the respective radio library supports it. Currently, ZHA supports migrating the Zigbee network between different Zigbee Coordinator adapters based on chips from Silicon Labs, Texas Instruments, or ConBee/RaspBee if the backup was made from inside ZHA.

## Migrating to a new Zigbee coordinator adapter inside ZHA

Follow this guide if you have a Zigbee Home Assistant (ZHA) network running and want to migrate from one Zigbee coordinator radio adapter to another Zigbee coordinator radio adapter.

### Prerequisites

> ### To migrate to a new Zigbee coordinator radio inside ZHA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### To migrate to a new Zigbee coordinator radio inside ZHA

```

- Your old Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter is used in the ZHA integration (not in deCONZ or MQTT)
- It is of radio type ezsp (Silicon Labs EmberZnet), znp (Texas Instruments Z-Stack ZNP), or deCONZ (ConBee/RaspBee from dresden elektronik).
  - If your old Zigbee coordinator is a deCONZ (ConBee/RaspBee) radio adapter, make sure it is running [firmware 0x26700700 (from 2021-08-18)](https://github.com/dresden-elektronik/deconz-rest-plugin/wiki/Firmware-Changelog) or later.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### To migrate to a new Zigbee coordinator radio inside ZHA

> ### To migrate to a new Zigbee coordinator radio inside ZHA

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### To migrate to a new Zigbee coordinator radio inside ZHA

```

### Prerequisites

- Your old Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter is used in the ZHA integration (not in deCONZ or MQTT)
- It is of radio type ezsp (Silicon Labs EmberZnet), znp (Texas Instruments Z-Stack ZNP), or deCONZ (ConBee/RaspBee from dresden elektronik).
  - If your old Zigbee coordinator is a deCONZ (ConBee/RaspBee) radio adapter, make sure it is running [firmware 0x26700700 (from 2021-08-18)](https://github.com/dresden-elektronik/deconz-rest-plugin/wiki/Firmware-Changelog) or later.

### To migrate to a new Zigbee coordinator radio inside ZHA

1. Go to **{% my integrations title="Settings > Devices & Services" %}** and select the ZHA integration. Then select **Configure**.
1. Under **Network settings**, select **Migrate radio**.
1. Reconfiguration of ZHA will start. Select **Submit**.
1. Under **Migrate or re-configure**, select **Migrate to a new radio**.
1. **Migrate to a new radio** will inform you that an automatic backup will be performed and that your old Zigbee coordinator radio will then be reset before the backup is automatically restored.

> - Select **Submit**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Select **Submit**.
```

>   - Select **Submit**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Select **Submit**.
```

1. **Unplug your old radio** will inform you that your old Zigbee coordinator radio has been reset and that you can now plug in your new Zigbee coordinator radio adapter.

>   - To avoid interference, use a USB extension cable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - To avoid interference, use a USB extension cable. 
```

>   - Use a USB 2.0 port or a powered USB 2.0 hub and keep the Zigbee stick away from USB 3.0 devices. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Use a USB 2.0 port or a powered USB 2.0 hub and keep the Zigbee stick away from USB 3.0 devices. 
```

>   - You may now also choose to either unplug your old Zigbee coordinator radio adapter or keep your old radio plugged in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - You may now also choose to either unplug your old Zigbee coordinator radio adapter or keep your old radio plugged in.
```

>   - If that radio was a combined Z-Wave and Zigbee radio, like the HUSBZB-1 adapter, then only the Zigbee radio part of it was reset. Confirm that the Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter is properly connected and select **Submit**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If that radio was a combined Z-Wave and Zigbee radio, like the HUSBZB-1 adapter, then only the Zigbee radio part of it was reset. Confirm that the Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter is properly connected and select **Submit**.
```

1.  You now need to start the backup restore process. 

>   - If your new Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter was automatically discovered by the Zigbee Home Automation (ZHA) integration, then select **Configure**.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If your new Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter was automatically discovered by the Zigbee Home Automation (ZHA) integration, then select **Configure**.  
```

>     - If your new Zigbee Coordinator radio adapter was automatically discovered by the Zigbee Home Automation (ZHA) integration, then select **Configure**.  

Reviewer 2: `Configure` only shows up during discovery. In the migration flow the serial ports will be listed as they are during ZHA setup:

```suggestion
    - Select your new Zigbee radio from the list of serial ports and select **Next**.
```

>   - If not, then you might first have to restart the radio migration flow. Under "*Network Settings**, select **Migrate radio** > **Reconfigure ZHA** > **Migrate to a new radio**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If not, then you might first have to restart the radio migration flow. Under "*Network Settings**, select **Migrate radio** > **Reconfigure ZHA** > **Migrate to a new radio**.
```

>     - If not, then you might first have to restart the radio migration flow. Under "*Network Settings**, select **Migrate radio** > **Reconfigure ZHA** > **Migrate to a new radio**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If not, then you might first have to restart the radio migration flow. Under **Network Settings**, select **Migrate radio** > **Reconfigure ZHA** > **Migrate to a new radio**.
```

>     - If not, then you might first have to restart the radio migration flow. Under **Network Settings**, select **Migrate radio** > **Reconfigure ZHA** > **Migrate to a new radio**.

Reviewer 2: Migration won't work if the current radio is unresponsive. You can use the re-configure flow to do this instead:

```suggestion
    - If your new radio does not appear or you need to reboot after plugging in new hardware, you can resume the migration after a reboot: under **Network Settings**, select **Re-configure the current radio** and choose your new radio.
```

> 1. Under **Network Formation**, select **Restore and automatic backup**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Under **Network Formation**, select **Restore an automatic backup**.
```

1. Under **Restore Automation Backup**, choose the latest automatic backup and select **Submit**.

> 1. Under **Overwrite Radio IEEE Address**, select the **Permanently replace the radio IEEE address** and select **Submit**. Overwriting the IEEE address may take a while. Wait. 

Reviewer 2: This screen won't appear for certain types of coordinators, or for new EZSP coordinators with firmware supporting the token interface:

```suggestion
1. If your radio requires overwriting the IEEE address, you will see a screen titled **Overwrite Radio IEEE Address**. Check the **Permanently replace the radio IEEE address** box and click **Submit**. Overwriting the IEEE address may take a while.
```

>   - Your old Zigbee Coordinator radio and your new stick will now have the same Zigbee IEEE address (unique MAC address for the Zigbee device). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Your old Zigbee Coordinator radio and your new stick will now have the same Zigbee IEEE address (unique MAC address for the Zigbee device). 
```

>   - Selecting this option is required for the migration process to complete successfully. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Selecting this option is required for the migration process to complete successfully. 
```

>   - From this point onwards, you should not operate the old stick in the same area unless you change the Zigbee IEEE address on it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - From this point onwards, you should not operate the old stick in the same area unless you change the Zigbee IEEE address on it. 
```

>   - If you do not migrate the Zigbee IEEE address from your old Zigbee Coordinator radio, then you will have to re-join/re-pair many of your devices in order to keep them working. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If you do not migrate the Zigbee IEEE address from your old Zigbee Coordinator radio, then you will have to re-join/re-pair many of your devices in order to keep them working. 
```

1. Finally, a **Success!** message should pop up with information that all options were successfully saved. 

>  - Select **Finish** to confirm. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Select **Finish** to confirm. 
```

> The migration process is complete. However, be aware that you will not be able to control all your existing Zigbee devices until they rejoined the Zigbee network again. Normally, they will rejoin within a couple of hours. You can accelerate the rejoin process by power-cycling your Zigbee devices.

Reviewer 2: Devices don't need to re-join the network during a coordinator swap, from their perspective the coordinator just reboots:

```suggestion
The migration process is complete. However, be aware that you will not be able to control your existing Zigbee devices until the new coordinator fully joins the network. This process can take a few minutes. If some existing devices do not function after some time, try power-cycling them to allow them to re-join the network.
```

Within ZHA is possible to use this backup and restore feature to migrate between some different radio types, if the respective radio library supports it. Currently, ZHA supports migrating the Zigbee network between different Zigbee Coordinator adapters based on chips from Silicon Labs, Texas Instruments, or ConBee/RaspBee if the backup was made from inside ZHA.

## Migrating to a new Zigbee coordinator adapter inside ZHA

Follow this guide if you have a Zigbee Home Assistant (ZHA) network running and want to migrate from one Zigbee coordinator radio adapter to another Zigbee coordinator radio adapter.

### Prerequisites

> ### To migrate to a new Zigbee coordinator radio inside ZHA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
